Are you able to hear me clearly?
Yes, we can. Fantastic.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak today.
Thank you to the members of the committee, to the submitters
and to the parliamentary staff and to the public at large.
I'm here before you, not just as a New Zealander,
but as someone deeply concerned about the ethical
implications of this bill
and what it signals about our relationship
to democracy itself.
The bill does not just merely adjust procedure,
it redraws the boundary between who is included
and who is excluded in the democratic process.
It proposes more restrictive registration requirements.
It introduces new barriers for some all in name of
strengthening integrity of electoral law,
and ensuring resilience of electoral system
and making sure that the wrong people don't vote
while increasing access by others,
by increasing their donation threshold in the name
of reducing the compliance burden.
But I ask you, integrity for whom
and resilience from what timeliness.
The advice is all that.
This is not going to help us determine results more quickly
and reducing the compliance burden for whom?
For political parties, for lobbyists, for donors,
because what this bill does intentionally
or not is make it harder for some to vote,
particularly Maori, particularly young people, transient,
vulnerable, C, committing communities, the elderly, those
who already face obstacles within the system
while increasing access undo cover for others.
And it does it using the soft language
of administrative reform
that this bureaucracy can be just as effective
as anything else in putting up a barrier.
And silence risks. Disenfranchisement.
The right to vote is a privilege not to be earned.
It is a right. Is it a condition of political existence?
It's how we say I am here. I count, I matter.
I shape the future alongside others.
I shape the future to which I belong.
And to make voting more difficult for anyone is
to reduce people to objects acted upon
rather than act subjects acting in the world.
This country was the first to grant women to vote a legacy
that we rightly honor.
But that honor means nothing if we allow the franchise
to slowly be made conditional again to erode it.
And we know that history does not only move forward,
it also retrieves quietly, procedurally
through legislation like this.
And we must decide whether to dist stand in defense
of our legacy or to allow it to erode.
Do we narrow representation or do we expand it?
This is not just about policy, it is about principle.
If ours is a democracy that fears
or objects to the full participation of our people, all
of us, is it a democracy?
Some people can vote, others cannot. Who decides?
Is it worth defending some of the principles
that really trouble me
and how we are acting as a country right now?
But I would now just turn briefly to a couple of snippets
that highlight my political participation.
Punctuation marks throughout my life.
We had political discourse over the family table,
dining table at night.
It doesn't sound very exciting when I say it that way,
but we would've heated debates, we would grow up, um,
talking about all manner of issues.
It was robust and we would often agree on
what the problems were,
but we would disagree on what the solutions were.
We would have family excursions exciting time again
to the voting booth and demonstrating
that civic participation and action.
I had that with my parents
and I have demonstrated that with my son.
We would wander on down, we would chat along the way,
and we would not be the only people doing that.
And I can tell you, for anyone who's a parent
or taken children on these things, you need
to make it enticing and engaging.
That's through stickers, through music, through laughter,
making the voting environment a welcoming place.
And you walk away with a sign
that you have participated in something communal,
that we are stronger together
and you can see others around you.
And we need to demonstrate that to our children.
So we need to make it welcoming to our children.
Now turn now to something
that I reflected on in my submission, which was a life
admin hiccup with my parents.
When they moved house having built,
bought a new property well into their eighties and one,
or they forgot to transfer the electricity bill
that resulted in them being cut off only for a matter
of hours, but it was easily done.
It was easily fixed because there was willingness.
But if that had been them on their electoral role
and they had turned up having voted
and participated in the democratic process since they came
of age, they would have been mortified.
They would've been felt incredibly let down by the system
who hasn't forgotten to update your details.
We have evidence of weaknesses in our system now just
with the local body elections, with a number
of candidates profiles being missed from booklets.
Anecdotally, hearing about people
who have fallen off one role or another.
Not a huge problem at this point
because people have becoming aware of it.
They can cast a special vote
and all as well that is going to change.
I urge you quite clearly and respectfully
and unequivocally, please reject this bill.
Do not let access to the vote be narrowed.
Do not allow our subject to be reduced to paperwork.
Do not legislate away the dignity
of democratic participation.
We should be investing in our democratic processes.
We should be investing in our people. Just make it open.
Make it easy for all of us. Thank you.
Alright, thank you for your, uh,
your very nice presentation.
Unfortunately, we're way over time,
but, um, thank you for joining us this afternoon.
Okay, now I'm gonna call Margo, uh, Ms.
Margo GOs to the front here. Very prompt.
The addressed, I thought. Yeah. Yes.
Trying to us back a hundred or so years. Cool.
The floor is yours. We've got five minutes.
Just leave some time for any questions if you can.
Ra chair and members
of the committee in parliamentary staff, thank you
for the opportunity to speak today.
My name is Margo Govers.
Today I appear not as myself,
but dressed in the spirit of Kate Shepherd.
She and the woman's Christian Temperance Union at once
published 10 reasons why Women Should Vote.
That Pamphlet, pamphlet helped to
transform our democracy in the same spirit.
I have my own 10 reasons.
10 reasons why we should not erect new barriers to voting.
Due to some time constraints.
I'll not cover them all,
but I'll highlight some of the most important for ones
that speak directly to the risks that this bill impose.
First voting is a right, not a favor.
Voting is not a privilege to be rationed.
It is a right guaranteed to every adult citizen
by the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act.
The Attorney General has already warned
that this Bill unjustifiably limits that right with the risk
of disenfranchising a great many New Zealanders.
And importantly, she also noted
that there is no clear evidence.
The counts would even be faster.
If election day enrollments were abolished,
we would pay a very heavy Democratic price
with no guarantees of benefit.
Second, the numbers are stark.
In 2023 election, around 450,000 people enrolled
or updated their details during the voting period,
including more than 110,000 on the election day itself.
These were not ineligible voters.
They were New Zealanders meeting every legal qualification.
The electoral commission's own report shows
that while this created administrative pressure,
the official results were delivered on time.
The commission recommended administrative improvements,
earlier, processing of special votes, digital roll markoff,
and better resourcing.
They did not recommend cutting voters off.
Third, working people need flexibility
More than 220,000 New Zealanders have multiple jobs.
They are shift workers, caregivers, commuters, people
who are time poor for them,
election day enrollment isn't procrastination.
It's often the only practical way to participate to remove
that option is to punish the busiest, the most stretched,
and often the most vulnerable members of our democracy.
Fourth vulnerable groups will be hit hardest.
It's not just the time pool who will be affected.
The, the groups most likely to enroll late are young voters,
Maori Pacifica, Asian communities, and renters.
They are precisely the groups already under pressure
around our democracy to set up new barriers
that fall heaviest on them
and is to deepen existing inequalities
and political voice and representation.
Fifth trust is at stake.
Public faith in elections depends on
fairness and accessibility.
If people believe the rules are designed to exclude them,
then trust in the system itself erodes
restricting access does not strengthen democracy.
It corrodes it. And
as the commission itself warned early cutoffs risk leaving
voters frustrated
and disillusioned, finally,
this is an administrative issue, not a democratic one.
Special votes take longer to process.
Both the governor, the attorney General,
and the electoral commission are clear.
Closing enrollments 13 days early does not
guarantee a faster result.
Yes, the number of voters using advance
and special voting is increasing.
That is a fact. And it does place
additional strain on the count.
But the growth is a sign of a healthy democracy.
More people participating,
more people finding ways to cast their votes.
The answer is to resource
and modernize the system to meet the demand, not
to cut people out of it.
We must fix the, the count, not the franchise.
As Kate Shepherd once said, all that separates whether race,
class, creed, or sex is inhuman
and must be overcome in 2025.
All that separates medi citizens from the,
their vote will be an arbitrary 13 day deadline.
That two must be overcome.
So I urge the committee, honor the legacy of 1893,
not unravel it in 2025.
Protect the right to vote.
Keep up democracy, open, fair, and universal.
Timely results are desirable,
but universal suffrage is essential. Ra
Well thank you for s um, presentation
and thank you for coming in person.
It's always more powerful when you turn up in person.
Thank Question five, Mr. Chair. What catch you?
But obviously huge figure in our democracy.
What do you think she would have to say?
Uh, in terms of the franchise being trimmed
as it is by this reform?
I think she voted really hard for women
and the, the, the WCTU as well, the voted really hard
to get woman the vote.
Um, and I think that she would be quite dismayed to realize
that now we are looking at cutting that vote simply
because it's harder to count it.
Okay. Alright. Thank you. Alright, thank you.
Uh, now we've got, uh, citizens and Vice Bureau, uh, Ms.
Uh, Kerry Dalton. Okay.
Good afternoon, Kerry. Um, we've got 10 minutes with you.
Uh, so looking forward to your submission
Core Kerry Dalton ua.
Um, so I'm the Chief Executive of Citizens of Vice Bureau
and Citizens of Vice Bureau is a nationwide,
locally based community organization that provides people
with free, confidential, independent advice and advocacy.
We are based in 80 locations throughout New Zealand
and our services provided by 2000 volunteers.
We help anyone with any question
or problem through our service.
We strengthen democracy in ro New Zealand
by empowering people to know what their rights
and responsibilities are and options to act on them.
We also use what we learn from our clients to speak out
for fear laws and policies and services,
and to challenge those
that have an adverse effect on people's rights or wellbeing.
We strongly oppose two key provisions
contained in this bill.
Namely closing enrollment 13 days before election day
and disqualifying all prisoners from
who are serving a prisoners,
a prison sentence from the right to vote.
Firstly, in relation to closing enrollment 13 days
before election day.
While we acknowledge the government's stated intent
to improve administrative efficiency
and electoral processes, the removal of same day enrollment
and the shift to closing enrollment 13 days
before election day risks undermining fundamental
democratic rights.
It has the potential to disenfranchise a large number
of eligible voters.
The CAB is one of the places that people come to get help
with enrolling on the electoral role.
This is a contribution we make
to ensuring everybody's ability
to participate in a process which is crucial to democracy
and fundamental to their rights.
Making the ability to participate as easy
as possible is some something that everyone,
especially our politicians, should strive
to promote and protect.
Therefore, it is very concerning
and disappointing that this bill seeks
to breed bring in a provision that is likely to limit
participation in elections.
We note that this is in contradiction
to advice from the Ministry of Justice
and a warning from the Attorney General
that it breaches the Bill of Rights.
Hello? Yes, we're here. Oh, good.
Suddenly you weren't we
Missing intently?
Excellent. Um, I was just saying that the
Attorney General has, um, warned that it breaches the Bill
of Rights and the Ministry of Justice states
that it could result in lower enrollment rates,
lower turnout, and more disallowed votes,
and that it reduces ease for voters
and creates a barrier to participation.
Protecting the right to vote
and promoting measures
for Democratic participation is too important to trade off
for efficiency in vote counting,
especially when the Attorney General, the Ministry
of Justice, and as I understand it,
the Electoral Commission itself
have questioned whether it will increase the speed in which
the final vote is counted.
So it will reduce participation in elections,
but will not address the problem it's trying to solve.
We recommend maintaining the status quo of the ability
to enroll, to vote right up to
and including election day in relation
to prisoners' rights to vote.
We are concerned about
and strongly oppose the Bill's proposal
to introduce a blanket ban on people in prison
being able to vote.
Our volunteers provide the CAB service to people in prisons
to ensure that they can get help in relation
to their rights and responsibilities.
The CAB phone number is an approved number
that people in prisons can call
to get information and advice.
Some of our people go into Taka Prison.
We provide the service despite getting no funding for it
to support people in prison
because everyone has human rights
and being treated with dignity
and respect is more likely to lead to more positive sense
of connection to community and society
and support successful reintegration into society.
Um, and I just, um, in preparation for the submission,
I talked to, uh, one of the people who goes into Reka Prison
and he was actually the voting place manager,
aka at the last general election.
And, um, I asked him, um, for his insights
and he said it was interesting to note
that we took over 400 votes from a prison population,
which was at 30 September, 2023,
715 made up of 362 people on remand
and 353 who were sentenced the age of those
who voted ranged between their twenties to their sixties
with most appearing to be in their thirties.
The vast majority said that they had never voted before.
Of those who said they'd never voted,
most weren't on the electoral role.
So their, um, the provision for them to vote, um,
had a significant impact on their
participation in voting system.
Um, we note
that the Attorney General in her report on this bill found
that a blanket ban on prisoner voting is inconsistent
with the Bill of Rights.
We also note that the treaty, the Wang Tribunal found
that the previous blanket ban was a serious breach
of Titi or Waitangi.
Um, the Waitangi tribunal reached this finding
because the ban disproportionately affected Maori
who are overrepresented in the prison system as a result
of systemic bias and social and economic disadvantage.
Wgi Tribunal recommended all restrictions on prisoner voting
should be removed as all Maori have a treaty right
to exercise the individual
and collective by being able
to exercise the vote in the appointment
of their political representatives.
From a democratic to
and human rights perspective,
the CAB opposes the blanket ban on prisoners' right to vote.
Okay. We support the view of the Waitangi Tribunal,
the Ministry of Justice, and the Independent electoral
review that all prisoners should be able to vote.
Kerry, um, I'm just conscious we've got some questions.
Sure. And you raised one issue that you haven't discussed,
which is one no one else has discussed.
So I'm going can I just, um,
unless you've got something else, I'd really like
to take the opportunity to ask you
some questions. That'd be good.
Yes, that would be really good.
I'd just would like to say one last thing.
Um, I hope that this committee
and the whole house in relation to this bill moves beyond
partisan politics to principle politics
and protects a fundamental tenant of our democracy,
the right to vote, um,
and keeps the elect the, the, the legitimacy of government
of Parliament itself is based on voting
in a general election.
The more inclusive the voting process,
the greater the the legitimacy.
Okay. Parliament? Yeah.
Okay. I'll go to Mr. Rutherford first.
Uh, Kerry, I'm just wondering if you can
tell us which other countries we compare ourselves to
that have, uh, same day enrollments, uh, up
until election day, please.
Um, I'm sorry, I I don't have that information.
Um, I can get it for you though.
Okay. Um, what about, say Australia?
Uh, one of our closest countries
that we often compare ourselves to that low's enrollment,
say for the 2019 federal election, 30 days
before the election.
Um, I'm focused on our democracy
and, um, how we would want it to operate in our country.
And that's what I'm representing today.
Okay. Can I ask you a question, Kerry?
Because you, you've raised something
that no one else has talked about,
but in the context of enrolling to vote,
central Elector Commission provides general
multichannel options, right?
Yes. Now, I don't know whether you were listening,
but we had the first, uh, GDES,
and I was asking him the same question.
He, he said the legislation is currently drafted
uses words, the effect of some form
of written communication.
And he said under that arrangement,
a text would probably be, uh, would meet that threshold.
Although I've asked them to provide more input on it.
Are you saying your, in terms of your ability
through your special specific channel tele, uh,
telecommunications channel that you have,
but are you saying that legislation is
that currently drafted would preclude that?
Because if it is, that's something we would be keenly
interested in understanding?
Um, I don't think it precludes precludes it.
Are you, it precludes, are you talking about precluding, um,
In terms of voting and, and registering
and doing all that sort of stuff
On mine or on paper? Bill
obviously doesn't deal with your, your good work
that you do with pri providing advice, general advice
to prisoners, but in, in the context of the voting, which is
what this bill's about Yeah.
Is do you see any limitation around what you currently do
or might do or you ought to do that you may not be able
to do under the current draft of the bill?
Um, I don't think so.
I think that what we were raising was more
what it empowers the electoral commission to do,
which may mean
that they put extra weighting on the online engagement.
Okay. That's Because of efficiencies?
Yeah. As opposed
To putting people's needs at the center of things.
Well, we're actually more worried that the postal,
they're gonna send stuff to old, uh,
old postal addresses, run the new one thing.
But if you see anything on that that you want
to further submit on, I'd invite you to do that.
That would be be really useful. Right.
Hey, thank you for your time today.
Um, and it's good to hear from you. Yes. Good. Thank you.
Thank you. Now we've got, um,
members from the New Zealand Public Service Association.
Is that correct? Good. We've got 10 minutes with you.
Sorry, I'm just trying to keep us on track. Okay,
No problem at all. Good
afternoon. I'm flu at Simons.
I'm one of our national secretaries
and I'm here with Andrew McCauley, our policy advisor.
I just wanna thank you for, uh, hearing our submission,
particularly on a Friday afternoon.
We're keen. Good. Excellent.
We should make some progress then.
Um, it won't hopefully be a surprise to you,
given you've got our submission
that we're worried about the impact of this bill.
We think it is dangerous for democracy.
We endorse the comments made by submitters
that have appeared, uh, particularly the ones
that have appeared just before us this afternoon.
We agree with the Citizens Advice Bureau
that if you put barriers in the way, it does start
to question the legitimacy of decisions made, uh,
in this building and in this, uh, environment.
We should only be looking for ways
to encourage more participation, not put up barriers.
What we've done in our submission is, um, we've taken a bit
of an unusual approach for us in these submissions.
We've actually gone to our members who work
for the electoral commission
and ask them for their input and advice.
Yeah. And I hope you will appreciate that they have done
that in a way that I think is
quite constructive and useful for you.
You'll see that they've taken, uh, positions both opposing,
uh, and supporting,
but it's very important that workers
through their union are able
to bring their voice in their perspective to this table.
Just wanna highlight some of the comments that they've made,
uh, in particular around the need for greater resourcing
of the work of the Electoral Commission.
Um, they've told us very clearly
that they don't have sufficient resourcing
to do their job well.
Um, they've also told us around the need
to scale up both throughout the electoral cycle on top
of the core permanent staff
and additional resources, for example, by elections,
which we've had a few of.
Um, and the huge scaling up that's necessary
during a general election to deal with the volume of work.
But interestingly, uh, just reinforcing the comments
that were made by the commission itself, they think that,
um, the bill wouldn't address the issues
that it's intended to address.
And I think some white should be given to the voices
of the people who work at the
commission when it comes to that.
The commission itself said this yesterday, I think it was
that they think our, our members, these workers think
that the, uh, legislation ministers are,
that ministers are underestimating the negative side
effects that will have.
And, and particularly that it won't have the, um, that,
that, that you, that there was a suggestion
that there'll be a strain on the system
to justify some of these changes.
And the voice of the workers is that that's misplaced
and, and not correct.
And finally, just allowing some time for questions.
I just wanted to read a couple of quotes from the workers.
The first one is that we have a gold standard electoral
system, but it costs to fund it properly,
politicians should see the system
as something to be proud of.
Not a burden to defund no other nation does as much
to make voting as easy as we do,
but you have to resource it properly.
Another one, um,
this I thought was a very good practical insight.
We lost a lot of long-term enrollment staff in 2022 when
some regional offices were closed.
When we ramped up in 2023 to respond
to general election enrollments, we had lots of people
who had never worked in electoral event before.
Yeah. A lot of institutional knowledge walked out the door
in 2022, and we paid the price in 2023.
And finally, because it's not all opposition.
I did wanna pick up the point that you just raised
with the Citizens Advice Bureau.
Uh, removing postal requirement freezes up
to explore other ways to get people information
that will help them participate in democracy.
Okay, cool. So we, there's
A few questions we've got, Uh, Ms. Walters first,
I've, uh, thank you Mr.
Chair, and thank you very much for the submission.
This is a, a unique perspective from us.
So that's for us that's really useful.
I wonder whether you heard anything about a sense of, um,
worry that there would be frustration from voters who
for the last 30 years have expected to be able
to register at least up till the day before the election.
And whether there is any sense
that they would be facing potentially safety issues
or certainly discomfort
or having to deal with, um, deescalating people
who are very frustrated that they can't register.
Yes. I think you are picking up on a theme
that came through with the feedback.
Um, it's particularly around, um,
these workers being very proud of being able
to get voters out and not wanting to put,
uh, barriers in place.
They talked about that the commission
said the commission had been working harder, not smarter,
and then they raised some concerns
and it was really around those barriers
that are put in place and the, um, lack of assurances
that we won't see a suppression in
voter turnout and enrollment.
Okay. Cool. Hey, thanks. Thank you very much.
Um, that is, it is really good actually way
to do a ion quite innovative.
So. Great. Um, obviously you mentioned
that they've been trying to tidy up
and had the order to general's report
that you're probably familiar with.
Um, and I found that statement that, you know,
we've got a gold standard
electoral system and interest fund.
There's a sense of pride there.
Um, when we had the electoral commission
and I talked about the culture and values
of the electoral commission
and that they, they aim for greater enrollments
and greater voter turnout.
I guess my question is, from a worker's perspective,
what will this step, which
will have lower enrollments
and lower voter turnout do to worker morale and culture?
I think it will go backwards.
You are right to say they're very proud of their work.
They are very proud of their work.
They want the New Zealand's democracy to flourish
and they want to enable as many people as want to
and can to vote.
So I think you're right to pick up on that as a, as a,
as a matter that's likely to lead
to reduce morale in that workplace and
Okay.
Organization. No, Undoubtedly. Okay. Go to Ms. Paul
And Kilda Andrew.
Um, thanks for the submission.
It's really helpful to have the, the voices
and the realities of workers in front of us.
Um, one question that I had was around the provisions
around food and entertainment being offered.
I know in the past, the electoral commission have done a lot
to try and entice particularly younger voters.
I've seen that a lot at universities
and just get, getting people enrolled
and interested in what's going on.
Um, did, did any of the people
or workers that you talked to make any comments about those
provisions that you might be able to share with us?
Um, we didn't specifically cover that part of the bill.
We focused mainly on the, um, the parts relating
to the workload of the commission
around the 15 day enrollment period.
Um, but yeah, not, not so much on the, um, on the treating
and the kind of food voter voting places,
But I think you are picking up on something which we know
to be true as well, that those staff put a lot of energy.
And you can certainly feel it on, uh, university campuses,
um, when they're around that there is a lot of, uh, pride
and energy and a little bit of merch as well.
Never goes a must and getting people engaged.
I couple of, uh, just wanna pick up on the, um, issue
around staffing in 2022.
Did they explain why the electoral commission decide
to get rid of staff and then have to rescale it up?
'cause that continuity and that expertise?
It's like any job, right?
There's a fair bit of specialist knowledge required.
Did they say why the electoral commission got rid
of staff back in 2022? Look,
Successive governments haven't funded it
properly. That's the reality.
Is it, are you, are you, do you know for sure
that's the reason why it happened 2022?
Well, that's the, the consistent message
that we've had from both the employer and the workers.
Okay. And that's not, uh, for lack of trying
by both the employer and with support
Of the workers. Okay. So just
a fact.
You may have heard yesterday,
but, uh, electoral commission's got an extra 7.6 million
that they noted yesterday for next year election.
They've got money set aside for doing the business plan
for the, uh, automatic enroll.
But hey, thank you for the submission, our very,
it is a good, um, approach to take.
Thank you very much. Thank you so much. Right. Cool.
Right now we're moving into Jonathan Clark by Zoom,
retired educator.
Are you here with us, Jonathan?
Uh, yes. Um, oh, good.
Yep. I, I'll, uh,
just see if I can, I've got five minutes.
Yeah. Okay. Uh, yep.
Uh, Yeah. Uh,
my name is Jono Clark.
I live in wha Thank you for the chance to speak.
I'll use my time to urge you not to disenfranchise anyone.
The sections of the bill, if enacted, will undermine
participation in our democracy by some of the most
marginalized members of our society, those
who are furthest away from the levers of power.
Maximizing the opportunity for everyone
to vote is one characteristic of a strong,
healthy democracy.
It is important to recognize
that a person's vote is important not only to themselves,
but for their children and for their grandchildren.
I'd like to first talk about, uh,
early closing of enrollment.
Current legislation demonstrates we can allow for people
to register to vote up to and including election day.
That is a win for democracy.
The bill claims closing enrollment earlier will help
to respond to the impact
that enrollment processing pressures are having on the
timeliness of the official count vote.
That to me, is a very weak argument at best when, uh,
set against the loss of a person's ability to vote.
There will be myriad reasons why people leave it
until election day to register.
There will be those who are facing major life challenges,
people who are suffering transient, homeless.
Uh, undoubtedly there will even be people
who are just hopelessly gloriously disorganized.
They should not lose the, the votes
to save the government a few bucks
and a country a couple of weeks of uncertainty.
There are are different ways to reduce the impact, perhaps
by moving to a four year election cycle.
I'd like to speak now to the prisoner's right to vote.
The bill casts the importance of the rule of law
and civic responsibility as the primary reason
to vote disenfranchise prisoners.
But as the Attorney general right,
honorable Judith Collins appointed out in her report the
relevant clauses in this bill contravene the Bill of Rights.
Please heed her advice.
The punishment for imprisonable crimes should be loss
of liberty only thereafter the role of corrections within
that, to quote Janice Adair, chief Inspector of the Office
of the Inspectorate, should be to humanize
and heal to help them on a pathway
to wellbeing and empowerment.
Just be aware that at least 20,000 children in New Zealand
have a parent and prison.
This bill would take away their voice,
their children's voice, their grandchildren's voice.
The authors of this bill implicitly want
to characterize prisoners as bad people.
We know most people
and pe uh, end up in prison not for being bad,
but due to, to, um, mental health problems,
substance addiction, sexual
and family violence, poverty, the many violences
of colonization,
other submitters will have impressed on you the numbers
and their significance.
We also know that many bad people remain quite happily
outside prison someon positions
of considerable wealth and power.
We need only to look across the Pacific Ocean to see that
in a strong democracy, we want everyone to so-called good
and bad to vote.
Voting should be compulsory, incentivized and celebrated.
The voting age should be lowered to 16 old enough
to have children old enough to vote.
The only way to lose the right to vote should be to die.
We should abolish the death penalty in, uh, we,
we abolished the death penalty in 1989.
Let's not start heading back that way.
Finally, I can see only perhaps one possible case
for disenfranchising, uh, a section of our society.
And this is light and symbolic.
That group is around about the same size
as the number of women in prison.
Perhaps parliamentary candidates should
relinquish their right to vote.
Perhaps they should surrender to the will of the people
and quest for their party to grasp the levers of power.
Let the rest of us decide whether they should
serve and lead.
Thank you for your time and attention.
Hey, thanks John for that, uh,
wonderful stimulating thought.
Thank you. Okay, we roll on.
But thank you for, uh, being
with us this afternoon right now.
Matthew Hart by Zoom, hopefully. Are you there, Matthew?
Can't hear you. Matthew. I've seen
Audio. How's that?
Very good. We can hear you now.
All right. Uh, hi.
Um, thank you for allowing me to submit.
Um, I am submitting as a individual.
I am not actually affiliated with, uh, any
groups, but, um, I am.
I am a New Zealand citizen
and I was born in apartheid South Africa.
Um, growing up during the end of that regime, I experienced
how their propaganda worked.
And while I am not an expert on propaganda myself,
Jason Stanley is, uh, he's the chair in
American Studies at the Munk School of Global Affairs
and Policy in Toronto.
Uh, in his book How Propaganda Works, Stanley argues
that political propaganda pretends to embody an ideal
while hollowing out and damaging that very ideal.
He goes on to show that flawed ideological beliefs hide the
true effect of propaganda
by reinterpreting the meaning of the original ideal.
So in other words, what I put to you is
that this bull pretends to strengthen the integrity
of electoral laws
by preventing some people from voting in future elections.
The only way that this could be true is if the goal
of this bull is not democracy itself.
Um, and I don't want to rely on expert opinions
because I'm sure you've heard many
before, including the, uh, the Attorney General
and many other former members of government
and um, members of civil society.
Um, but what I would like
to do is just explain this in terms
that may resonate more using vibes.
So in my opinion, most laws
that made apartheids possible would not be passed today
if they used the same language that they did back then.
So if a member of the Apartheid National Party
suddenly appeared as a member of New Zealand government
of today, I feel like this electoral
amendment bull is the type of bull they could write a bull
that doesn't explicitly mention a targeted class, race
or ethnic group, but one
that removes their rights, nonetheless.
A bull that politically favors on democratic means
of, um, of remaining in power, a bull
that should be checked in the bin alongside
the flawed ideology that that created it.
Um, and I recommend replacing this ball with one
that rather implements the recommendations
of the independent electoral review of 2023 in full.
Right. Thank you Mr. Hart. Um, any questions from anyone?
She All right. Thank you. Have you still there, Mr. Hart?
Okay. Thank you for your submission. Right.
Uh, we're going to go to the Christchurch Youth, uh,
council Incorporated.
Uh, is it Katie? I only saw her first name. Is it
right?
Hello? I dunno all your names,
but, um, I think we've got 10 minutes with you.
Um, please leave some time for questions, but, uh, floor's.
Yours
can't hear you.
Can't hear you, unfortunately.
Yeah, there we are. Hopefully.
Hi. Hello. Uh, I'm Dean Banks.
Um, I voted in the last two national elections
and also the last two local elections,
um, here in Christchurch.
I just, um, finished a degree, uh,
within a Master's of engineering.
And I'm an ex, uh, executive member
of the Christchurch Youth Council, um, sort
of representing young people, um,
in, in the Christchurch area.
We're very excited to sort of present our thoughts
and, um, about, about the bill.
Got, uh, my name's Thomas.
I'm an officer at the Christchurch Youth Council,
and I recently just cast my first ballot
for the local elections as a first time voter.
Fantastic. Kda. My name is Chloe Dly.
I'm 13 years old and I go to Girls High School.
And I have the privilege of serving
as the youngest executive member
of the Christchurch Youth Council,
KHI Christchurch Youth Council.
As a youth led organization that exists to advocate
for the interests and wellbeing of young people in our city,
we work to ensure that youth voices are heard in local
decision making, and we support initiatives
that strengthen civic participation and equity.
We appreciate the opportunity to speak
to the Electoral Amendment bill.
While I'll leave the detailed policy points
to the other team, I want to emphasize
that this bill matters to young people.
It affects how we enroll, how we vote,
and how we see ourselves reflected
in the democratic process.
We support reforms that make voting more accessible,
more inclusive, and more empowering, especially
for Ranga Maori disabled youth
and those who face barriers to participation.
We also believe that civic education
and youth lead outreach are essential
to making these reforms meaningful in practice.
CYC is an independent and nonpartisan organization,
and has developed our recommendations that we provide
to the select committee today with full autonomy
and a consultation with Ang Tahi from across OT Tahi.
Um, one of our most pressing concerns is
around the removal of same day, uh, voting registration.
Um, I myself, uh, used same day registration.
Um, when I first voted in the 2020 election.
Um, I moved from Wellington to Christchurch
and I wasn't aware that in order to vote for the,
the local MP yet to change
where your registered address was.
Um, so despite sort of not being able to do any of that,
I was able to still register for that area
and vote, do my own research,
and was able to participate in that process,
which is something that I really appreciated.
Um, young people are often moving wide at the time
that they're gaining the opportunity to vote a, the ages
of 18 and 19.
So, um, I really want to encourage this, um, this period,
this sort of grace period to remain.
Um, it really allows youth to sort of be engaged in,
become en engaged in the, in democratic processes,
which is really what we want to happen.
Like youth engagement is so critical
to having a true representative democracy.
Um, and like as youth participation advising, we want
to encourage mechanisms that allow them
to participate rather than discourage it.
Um, um, young people who are moving, who are working, um,
who are parents who were disabled, um, should,
should never be excluded from the voting process.
Um, and I believe that the, the sort
of same day registration period makes it much more
accessible to everyone.
Um, and that is the sort of best way to make a truly
improved, strong democratic system.
Another key concern we have about this bill is the
blanket ban on prisoner voting.
Maori are disproportionately imprisoned, not
because of individual failings, but
because of the deep inequities built into our systems.
Removing the right to vote through the disempowers
communities that are already carrying the weight
of colonization and disadvantage.
Supporting Maori participation in democracy
means ensuring their voices are heard and not silenced.
People in prison are still affected by laws,
and those laws continue
to shape their whanau and their futures.
They should not lose the ability to have a say.
We are also worried about the proposed changes
to political donations.
Increasing the limit
for anonymous donations gives wealthier people greater
influence in our politics.
Young people in marginalized communities do not have
thousands of dollars to contribute.
We only have our voices and our votes.
If money matters more than people,
the system becomes even less fear.
Both of these changes exclude those
who need to be heard most.
If we want a genuine democracy in,
everyone should have the same chance to participate,
whether they're young Maori incarcerated
or struggling financially.
That's why we are asking you to protect accessible voting.
Stop the prisoner voting ban and keep donation rules. Fear
Kota. We have looked
closely at the electoral amendment bill.
We feel that the reasoning
behind the proposed changes don't outweigh the
net negative effects.
Our concern is the real impact on young people
and marginalized communities.
That's why we recommend five key actions.
First, maintain same day enrollment.
So ranta and people from minorities, new immigrants
to New Zealand, full-time workers
or shift workers, single parents
or transient communities are not shut, shut out
of the democratic process.
Second, remove the blanket ban on prisoner voting
or adopt a proportional rights space approach
so prisoners voices are not silenced.
Third, retain
or even lower the threshold
for anonymous political donations to protect fairness
and limit disproportionate influence from wealthy donors.
Fourth, invest in youth engagement and civic education.
So young people feel confident to participate in elections.
And finally, ensure voting is accessible to everyone,
especially those in transient housing with disabilities
or facing social economic challenges.
Democracy should be about breaking down barriers
to participation, not putting up new ones.
Everyone in Urdo deserves to have their voice heard. Nui,
Thank you very much for taking the time to listen to us.
We really appreciate it and we hope that you hear our voices
and the voices that we would present, uh, of,
of, of Christchurch.
Thank you. Um, I think we've got a question from Mr. Nala.
Is that right? Or was that you? You didn't
No, but Kto thank you team.
Always good to hear from the Christchurch Youth
Council. Kda. Thanks
Very much. Yeah, thank you very
much. Right now I've got, um,
Ms. Theresa Butler, I think.
Here we are. Are you ready to go?
I, Tina, thank you.
I stand here representing
and the people of Otto, we come to you today, not just
as Maori, but as CI citizens concern for all New Zealanders.
For the fabric of our democracy, our communities,
and the future of our city,
we strongly oppose electoral amendment Bill.
While it, it, it's framed as a clarification
of treaty principles.
The reality is that it undermines te
weakens democratic processes
and threatens the social, economic
and legal foundations of UA.
Point one, undermining Tonga at the heart of te
is Tonga Maori self-determination
and authority over our affairs.
This bill seeks to redefine treaty principles, uh,
without meaningful consultation with iwi, hapu,
and Maori organizations.
By removing genuine recognition of Maori authority,
it diminishes the Crown Maori partnership.
The Waitangi Tribunal has repeatedly warned against the
legislation that diminishes Maori rights.
This bill risks being one
of those most comprehensive breaches
of the treaty in modern times for the people
of Otto Tahi.
This is more than symbolic.
It impacts local governance, consultation over land, water,
and community development,
and our ability to participate
as equals in a decision making.
Point two, the legal
and constitutional uncertainty treaty principles are
embedded in law across for environmental management
to health and education.
Redefining or undermining these principles, risk
creating legal chaos.
Businesses, councils,
and communities could face costly legal challenges.
Taxpayers will ultimately bear the cost
of uncertainty in, uh, legislation.
For OT tahi residents, this is a real concern.
Our city is actively managing growth infrastructure
and environmental protection, all of which require clear,
stable governance frameworks.
The bill threatens that stability.
Point three, weakening democracy.
Over 300 submissions were made on
and over 90% opposed.
Advancing a law against such overwhelming public opposition
weakens trust in the democratic processes.
Democracy is not just about parliament,
it is about the voices of the people being heard
and respected.
Ignoring the views of citizens, Maori
and ma non Maori alike erodes confidence and governance.
The people of Otto Tahi, like many across,
expect their voices to matter.
This bill risk sending a clear message that public opinion
and treaty partnership can be disregarded.
Point four, social division and equity concerns.
The build framing of formal equality
is ignores the principles of equity, giving people
what they need to achieve, achieve fairness
at risk creating division between Maori and Paia.
And look, we're already seeing that happening right now.
But also between other minority communities
and the state equity initiatives
and health, education, housing
and social services rely on treaty frameworks.
Weakening them, harms everyone who relies on fair access
to opportunities and support.
OT is a diverse city home of Maori, Pacifica,
Pacifica, migrants, and other communities.
This bill threatens social e uh, cohesion
and unity that will have worked hard to build.
Point five. Economic and international implications.
Existing treaty settlements, support
indu industries like fisheries, agriculture and tourism.
Undermining the treaty threatens economic stability.
New Zealand's international reputation, reputation
for respecting indigenous rights is a key part
of our global credibility.
Weakening the treaty undermines trade, human rights,
standing and global partnership
for auto tahi businesses and families.
This is not theological.
It affects investment, job security,
and the wellbeing of our city.
Tenda. We urge parliament to reject the electoral amendment.
Bill undermines Ari, as we all know,
and Maori self-determination.
It weakens democracy, erodes legal stability
and risk social division.
It threatens the economic security
and global reputation of Tua.
The people of Otto Tahi
and all New Zealanders deserve a government
that strengthens partnership, protects our treaty
and unites rather than divides.
We call on parliament to listen to the voices of our whanau,
uh, and stand with the communities
it represents rather than weakening them.
Hey, thank you very much. Yeah, Theresa, thank you.
Any questions? No, thank you though. There. Okay.
Hey, thank you very much for joining us this afternoon.
Thank you, Yahi.
Okay, MHI, uh, now we have,
um, Ms. Hazel Armstrong.
Yes. Thank you very much. Thank you for your time.
That's alright. People that are up there as well. Yeah.
Um, so I do, I'm only gonna speak to one issue Good.
'cause I've only got five minutes. Yep.
Uh, which is the, I do not support the limitations
and posed by the bill on the prisoner's right to vote.
Um, so I'm actually gonna speak from my own professional
knowledge of people who have been injured, uh,
because of their injury.
They have committed acts that have landed them in prison.
Um, so I'm an a CC lawyer
and I've been in this practice for over 25 years.
So over that time, people have come
and gone some into prison
and some out, um, this bill will restrict the right to vote
for about 2000 people.
I, I got that figure from the New Zealand
Law Society submission.
And most of that 2000, uh, of those people
will eventually return to civil society.
Um, but the problem is what loyalty will they have
to civic norms if during their term
of imprisonment they've been denied the right to vote
and denied the right to representation while imprison.
And that's the kind of main point that I'm going to speak
to you as politicians.
So I'm speaking about from my own experience
of people who've been injured
and you, so you've got injuries such as PTSD,
post-traumatic stress,
people who've got head injuries from all sorts of things
that have happened in their life.
People with hearing loss, actually.
Uh, and there are many injuries that lead people
to be excluded from society.
That's what I've found.
Um, and because of their injury, they, they stay home.
Or if they've got a home, they don't participate in society
because they, they feel ashamed sometimes
and they just can't do it.
So accompanying this injury,
and I must say it's hard for a lawyer, is frustration
and anger and sometimes violence and depression.
So they don't only just come with the head injury, they come
with all of these other, uh, issues as well.
And unfortunately, sometimes their frustration
and anger boils over and they commit offenses
and sometimes they land up in prison.
And really, my plea to you is that what these people need,
and I'm, I suppose I I was gonna say guys,
largely I'm dealing with men, um, is
that they need rehabilitation
and treatment actually, once they're there.
Um, 'cause what I've found is
that not only are injured people suffering the effects
of the injury, depending on their age when they're injured,
but often, uh,
and you'll find this in your electoral work,
that they're suffering from literacy problems
and digital exclusion.
Yeah. You'll have found those people coming to your offices.
And this raises barriers for inclusion and civic society.
And I have to say, society is very hard
for these people now, um, to, to go online
and do all the things that they need to do.
And if they land up in prison, what they're losing
with this bill is your voice, the political voice, a voice
that can speak for them in places where decision
decisions are made in their lives.
So there's very lofty ideals,
and you'll have heard about all those lofty ideals from the
Human Rights Commission and the law society.
They'll be talking about the, the decent society and,
and, uh, democratic involvement.
But what I want to talk to you about is
what is driving this bill?
Uh, it's the real politics behind this bill
that I'm concerned about,
and the consequences for a decent society.
So losing the right to vote means
that prisoners are not politically represented
and with political representation,
they have a voice without it, they're politically silenced.
So some of you people might be in marginal electrics
or on the list or whatever,
and you might be thinking, every vote counts.
I have to get out there and every vote counts.
But if the prisoners vote, it doesn't count.
You're not gonna spend any of your political capital
or political time, uh, trying to seek those people out.
And nor will the political parties, I have to say,
they will be saying to the politicians, every effort
that you make to get reelected is precious.
So don't spend time on people who can't vote.
That's a cynical view. I know.
Uh, but you know, all of us have been involved in politics
for a long time, and you need to get votes.
And so if people can't vote, they're not going to,
you're not gonna spend yours precious time with them.
So my concern is that this bill doesn't encourage you
as politicians to represent people in prison.
They become dark, they become silent.
I'm saying to you, as politicians,
we all want a decent society.
Every one of us in this room wants a decent society.
And a decent society will provide prisoners
with education about voting, give assistance to vote,
and facilitate the act of voting.
And those actions will assist in rehabilitating prisoners.
And rehabilitation of prisoners is essential
for a functioning and inclusive society.
So what I'm asking you, um, as the, as decent people
who have put your lives, um, into, uh, political work is
to recommend that this part of the bill should not proceed.
So thank you for your time. Hey,
Well thank you for your submission.
I think we've got a question from Honorable Julianne Genter.
Oh, very sure. Oh, you had your, I thought you had before.
Hello? No, I don't think so. Right.
We'll go to Ms. Walters, your
Honor, just thank you very much
for your submission. I thought it was very
Oh, Sorry. We are
Gonna
Oh, she did. Sorry. Okay.
Thank you. It's me. Thank you very
much for your submission.
Um, I wondered if you had any comment on the logic
or lack thereof of taking away the right
for those people in prison in a blanket way to vote,
but allowing it for people who develop, um, um,
mental health issue while they're in prison
who are then transferred to a mental health facility.
Yes, exactly. Well, I mean,
the, everyone has said this to you.
It's the inconsistency of that, you know, a person
who has been a prison and then they're put into a hospital
or a other institution and they can vote,
but if they returned on voting day, they can't.
So it's, it's an inconsistency.
And it kind of shows too that, that you kind of know
as politicians, those of you who are backing the bill, that,
that you had to make some exceptions, didn't you?
I mean, otherwise you wouldn't have that there.
And I'm saying, look, don't have all
of these little exceptions.
Just allow prisoners to vote.
Don't put that banon,
and then have these little funny exceptions on the side.
So I don't see the logic of it, if
that's what's driving your question.
Alright. Hey, thank you for coming today
and turning up in person.
Always best, as I've said before. So thank you for coming
And thank you very much for, for
Your, and are you continuing your work?
Uh, say that again. Are you
continuing your work today? You
Mean? 'cause you're looking at
my age? Yes.
It's well known for a No, I'm hoping, I'm hoping you're
Yes, I am.
I like it still. What about you?
Love to, Hey, good on you. Hey, thank you.
Now we've got Rebecca, uh, Barrington, uh,
by Zoom, haven't we?
Rebecca, are you there?
I Am. Oh, good. Good to see you this afternoon.
We've got five minutes with, with you.
Uh, yes. So my name's Rebecca Merton.
Um, I'm a project manager.
Uh, I live in Auckland
with my 13-year-old son and my husband.
Um, and I'm really pleased to be here as, as just a citizen.
Um, and I wanna be clear, I I oppose this bill.
Um, from my experience over the years
and across successive governments, it's only become easier
to engage with government.
And it's been an amazing strength of our country
and something we should all be proud of.
Um, I, I don't think that there's any problem to solve here.
And, um, I now even understand that the,
even the small time saving
that has been promoted won't be achieved.
I think all this bill will do is create barriers
for people who want to vote.
Um, I understand that the last election,
almost 100,000 people enrolled in the last 12 days.
And if even half of them lost the chance to vote,
that would silence thousands.
Um, and it would impact groups of people unfairly,
um, impact on young people, Maori and Pacifica.
And it's not, this proposed amendment is
not strengthening democracy.
And that's actually something
that the government should always be focused on.
Um, I believe in fact it's voter suppression.
And I think that this bill unfairly benefits the incumbents
instead of serving all citizens.
Um, we should be making it easier for people
to vote not harder
and the amendment shouldn't be progressed.
And that's, that's my submission.
Hey, thank you very much for that.
Have we got any questions from anyone?
No, but thank you for that submission.
I think you've hit the nail on the head.
Kiana, thank you, uh, Rebecca for joining us this afternoon.
Alright. Right now we go to, uh, Jean
Hera by Zoom as well.
Jean, are you with us?
Is she online? What was this? Jean? We are, um, I'm
Kiara. Kiara.
Hello, I'm here. I'm Koto. I'm Jean Hera.
Um, I bring my background
as a registered social worker who's always
worked in the community.
Um, I've worked a lot with people with low income, a lot
with, um, with women.
And I feel really passionately about this bill that,
that we shouldn't, uh, put barriers up
to people accessing the right to vote.
I know that when you are poor, life brings a lot
of additional challenges.
It's often chaotic and often focused on survival.
And often you make plans and then they don't happen
because things get in the way,
like transport doesn't work out.
So voting needs to be as easy as possible for those
who vote, who face such challenges.
I view voting as a part of universal human rights
and human rights are the cause.
We are human and not just for those
who are considered deserving.
The changes in this bill would make voting less accessible
and is undermining this principle of universal suffrage,
um, for those who are at the age
where they're eligible to vote.
So social justice a is a core principle
to social work and I I've thoughts
of hard about it in those terms.
And, and equal rights should also extend
to include equitable opportunities and outcomes.
Equality doesn't necessarily give equal outcomes.
We need equitable justice in our voting system.
A fear of voting system is about democracy and justice.
And uh, I've come across one breakdown of justice.
So distributed justice, fair allocation of resources,
procedural justice, fair processes
and participation, recognition, justice, dignity, respect,
cultural acknowledgement, restorative justice, ability
to heal or repair relationships.
And we also have to treat your Wang justice,
which needs to be recognized.
And this has been talked about also, um,
that the voting system needs to recognize honoring tutti.
The government's arguments for changes in the bill, um,
is being needed to speed up the voting count
and election outcome don't ring true.
Overseas voting will similarly still
delay the final outcome.
And I note the electoral Commission has advised
that the changes proposed will not shorten the election.
Outcome and
that it will still take 20 days after the election.
I'm, uh, ve vehemently opposed
to closing voter enrollment earlier
and needs to continue up to election day to enable those who
are maybe less organized in life
and don't realize they're not on the roll.
They, they need to be, be as easy
as possible for everyone to vote.
Um, I'm opposed to reducing financial reporting requirements
and think these should be stricter
and donations to be kept to make it fairer.
I'm opposed to disqualifying prisoners from voting.
I think all prisoners should be able to vote
because I think it's a universal, right?
I support voting rights for every person over 16
and civics education in schools to assist young people
to understand voting
and get them in the habit of, of participating in,
in the voting process.
I wanna finish by just acknowledging that the job of serving
as an MP as a minister is a tough job
and it can be hurtful, but politics is not a game.
Politicians have to, I feel, have to see it
as a sacred duty to uphold integrity, not only personally,
but for the, the whole political system.
Politicians need to be authentic, just truthful,
and show humility.
They need to work for the benefit all especially remembering
those most vulnerable.
This commitment is not something
that I feel I'm, I'm witnessing in general.
It doesn't need to be like this. Politics is not a game.
It's a sacred duty to serve.
Alright, Thank you for the opportunity.
Thank you Doctor. Um, very good submission comprehensive.
Um, so thank you for your contribution.
Well thank you for that. Yeah. Alright,
now we've got Mr. Lawson there
with this wonderful library in the background.
Um, Mr. Lawson, we've got five minutes with you.
Hmm? Yes.
Um, like all your other submitters I've had so far,
I'm opposed to this bill.
Um, one of the things that troubles me is that,
as other people have said in the last election,
roughly 110,000 people, um, enrolled
to vote in the last 12 days of the election.
And this bill wouldn't have allowed that.
Um, about 3% of voters, um, would've been disenfranchised
and 3% soften the margin between winning
or losing an election.
Um, 'cause for those of us who are owner occupiers
and stay in the same house for decades, it's no problem.
Um, that orange envelope still turns up.
We still throw it away
and we still remain on the electoral list.
But for tenants who can be thrown out for no reason,
it's another burden to add to the hassle
of finding new accommodation, new schools, new transport,
all the other problems that you have when you move house.
Um, looking at the electoral donations, um,
the section 119 replaces, um, $5,000
with $6,000.
Um, that figure was set in 2022.
Inflation since then has been about 10%.
So on the basis of inflation, it would be not 6,000,
but five and a half thousand.
But it seems to me that anyway, 5,000 is too high.
Um, I look at the median weekly income
and Sta end said, tells me it's $959.
Um, so $6,000 represents over a month c income
for a lot of people in this country.
Um, and it seems to me that our vote should be secret,
but not our donations.
If we feel strongly enough about the value
of a political party to donate to it,
we should also be willing to support it with our name
and not be anonymous.
Um, looking at the issue, which has taken up a lot of time,
uh, the prisons, um, I'm not sure whether the number
of prisoners who vote, I keep seeing different figures.
Um, I found a, uh,
a data spreadsheet on prison votes, which showed
that there were only 73 voters voting in the last election
out of almost 6,000.
Um, but I also heard Kerry Dalton say that 400 out
of 715 voted at aka.
So I dunno whether you've got any more, uh, UpToDate figures
or accurate figures that seem to be wide variation there,
but it seems to me anyway that part of teaching prisoners
to be responsible citizens should be teaching them
to vote rather than preventing them from voting.
Uh, the Ministry of Justice says that there's no evidence
that suggests displaying dis disqualifying
sentence prisoners from voting deters them from committing
crimes or helps the victims feel safer.
So why do it? The ministry doesn't support the proposed ban
on prisoner voting.
The right to vote, they say, should be regarded as a priv,
not, not as a privilege,
but allowing prisoners to exercise their democratic rights
and say that's consistent
with our international human rights obligations.
And with the Crown's Treaty obligations.
Um, they say that imprisonment is the punishment
and there's no merit in also removing electoral rights.
Um, my guess is that many prisoners, um,
probably hold the view that if voting changed anything,
then it'd be abolished.
Um, and for many of, for those of us
who believe in democracy, that's not a view
that we want to push forward.
Um, in 2018, the Maori were
11.4 times more likely to be removed from the electoral role
because of a prison sentence than non Maori.
So that's where they treaty obligations come into it.
And it's like they also the ministry.
So it's also likely to be inconsistent with
our obligations under the international convention on the
elimination of all forms of racial discrimination.
And they also, um, say that it affects,
um, the electoral rights in particular of Maori people.
Um, there also seems to be an arbitrary aspect as well,
which I mentioned in my submission
that a prisoner in jail at two election time loses their
vote, but those in jail over other periods don't.
Uh, and I don't understand why you would want
to introduce something like that.
So essentially those are the points I wanted to make.
So thank you for listening to me.
Thank, uh, thank you Mr. Lawson.
Um, have we got any comments from members?
No, but thank you. Good submission. Excellent.
Yeah, make really good points.
Alright, thank you Mr. Lawson.
Um, now we can't get the tertiary education union,
uh, so we all the other submitters,
but if you want be in the meantime,
why don't we just take members, we might just literally take
four minutes or so.
What about that? And then, uh, we'll resume.
That'll give time. Hopefully get the tertiary education
union back on board.
Okay, we're slightly ahead of schedule.
We're almost at the end. Bizarre. Righto.
Um, everyone, um, unfortunately the tertiary education
unit's not available, so we'll jump forward again to Nikki.
Is it? Yeah, Nikki, uh, spring. Nikki, are you with us?
Okay, Ms. Spring, are you there?
Is she on line yet? Ms. Spring, are you there?
Are you mainly, oh, there you are. Hey, lemme see you.
Sorry. Slightly head of center.
We've, uh, had one person, one group, uh, drop out.
So, uh, floor's. Yours.
Okay. Well, um,
k um, Robinson.
Um, so, um, Kilda,
thank you for the opportunity to, um, speak
to my submission.
I'm gonna take it that my submission is of course,
um, has been read.
Yep. Um, haven't done this
one in my second time, I've done that.
So I've got some notes so I can stick to topic.
Um, so I strongly oppose, uh, the changes
proposed in the electoral amendment bill.
I was having a look at some of the reasons that the, um,
minister put forward these changes.
And he talked about overhauling, outdated
and unsustainable electoral laws.
And I kind of think that what's outdated is allowing same,
is not allowing same day enrollment
and voting during the digital age.
So I see that in budget,
20 25, 80 $0.6 million was put aside over four years
to approve and modernize election processes.
So if that's the case, I think it's disingenuous to say
that, um, removing the right to vote to, uh, enroll
and vote on the same day, um, uh, needs
to be changed.
Um, I'm also concerned about the lack
of public consultation.
It felt very rushed along with,
I think I've made more submissions in the last year than I
have in my entire life, and it felt really rushed.
But I feel really strongly about this.
I used to be on a school board.
We were really committed to having our, um, tamari
and Kopa, um,
learn about the electoral process being really important
in participating.
So, you know, right from year five we started having,
uh, initiatives within the classroom around
how we can encourage participation in the voting process.
And we live in a really modern, busy age.
I'm a working mother. I, I birthed
and went to uni while raising my
children and working full time.
So I think in the busy two income household,
um, households, that it's really important
that we allow flexibility
and in our day so that we can vote, enroll
and vote at the same time.
Um, I also can't, um,
well Paul Goldsmith said that he has every confidence
that voters will adapt to any proposed changes such
as not being able to roll 13 days out from the election.
I don't, I haven't been able to find any evidence to back
that statement up,
but what I have found is I've read some really good other
submissions, including the paper, um, written
around the impact of these, uh, law changes.
And, and I, um, and so I just want to highlight
that I support, um, all those, all the research
that I've done supports that these changes,
the benefits from these changes, um, uh,
won't outweigh the costs
or the loss to be able
to participate in the parliamentary process.
Um, another issue that he talked about, uh, timeliness.
Um, I've already said I don't think there's anything
outdated and being able to enroll and vote on the same day,
but I want to actually highlight
that it took 44 days post-election from when the government,
from when the election closed
and when the government was sworn in.
So if we are looking at timeliness
and making a more efficient use of time,
then perhaps the those that are um,
forming governments can reduce the 44 days down
to maybe the 20 days that are expected
for all votes to be counted.
Who also wanted to highlight around participation
that Professor Gdes from Otago University made a really
strong argument backed by actual research
and evidence that special votes since including same day
votes, have traditionally favored the parties
of the left, left.
Um, and a quote from him is restricting same day enrollment
and voting can not be predicted to reduce the number
of votes cast by groups that support left
of center policies.
So it feels a bit disingenuous
that this is stacking the deck towards
a certain political grouping, um, against, right, yeah.
While at the same time eroding the democratic process of
participation and your last election, 21%
of total votes cast were special votes.
So that's a significant number of voters
who voice will be diminished or excluded due to this bill.
I also want to speak to one of the core,
well my understandings only did poll politics 1 0 1 at uni,
but one of my core understandings, the core of democracy,
um, is that we must,
there must be some integrity in the system.
And speaking on that, you know, I've had members
of my own whanau
that were moved off the Maori role in automated system.
So I think that's impacting our integrity.
If I have a look at the local, um, uh, local body elections
and the lack of information for Maori ward candidates
and how that was handled by the electoral commission, um,
and that that era wasn't remediated,
that has a huge impact on integrity
and of the political system.
And so, um,
and so too, do this,
do these changes impact the integrity of the system?
Um, no,
and I think that, I think I've covered everything.
Alright, good. Can I ask a question just that last, uh,
point you were just making?
Yes. Uh, factory, it,
you were talking about people going on the dormant role.
Is that what you were implying with the No,
No. There were members of my family
who had lived at this.
We live on a papa who have lived at the same address,
who have always voted, who were on the Maori role
and got shifted off the Maori role.
And you couldn't ascertain why
that happened. It was just random.
No, but we didn't thing it.
And there was an invest, I know, um, I wrote to my local MP
who was, um, and to Maori, uh,
and I also fed that back to my iwi
because I actually think that that is
a breach of my rights under
Yeah. So
it, so we're talking about integrity.
The point why I raised that is
because we're talking integrity
of our political system. Yeah.
Alright, good. Um, I don't see any other questions,
but thank you for your con uh, contribution.
Good. Thank you. Are you at
that holiday resort that's behind you?
I wish, but no, it's gonna be another three weeks
before I'm at that particular holiday.
You can, you can be dreaming of it. Good luck out you.
I'm channeling it early.
Hey, thank you. Hey, thanks for contribution. Okay.
Thank you. Bye. Now who have we got now?
Have we got Nikki? Uh, have we got Chris Hawkins or right?
Mr. Hawkins? Uh, you're on. You need to take your good.
How are you?
Hello. I'm good, thank you.
Um, it doesn't seem that my camera is working,
but I could try to join with my phone.
That's all right. We've got five minutes.
So, um, the floor is yours anyway.
Um, all right. Um,
yeah.
Um, okay. I might just join.
We had the same problem this morning.
We had no sound for about 20 minutes. So
Are are you getting, are you getting sound from me?
Yeah, your sounds great.
Okay. Um, thank you.
Um, good afternoon, uh, justice Select Committee.
Um, thank you for the opportunity to speak.
Um, my name is Christopher Hawkins and I'm a student of law
and political science at Otago University.
Um, I'm also a volunteer with Generation Vote, uh,
nonpartisan civics education group
that teaches in local high schools.
I am aware that it's the very end of a long day
and some of you'll be keen to get this over with.
Um, so I'll try not to go in for too long. No doubt.
Many submitters have already raised the
primary issue with this bill.
Um, the requirement for voters to be enrolled prior
to the start of advanced voting,
which is a change from the current system where you can, um,
enroll up to and including election day.
This change runs against a trend
of facilitating greater democratic participation.
And the regulatory impact statement in attorneys general's
report have both flagged the potential for this
to disenfranchise a significant number of voters.
What concerns me the most about all of this is the risk
to New Zealand's political culture.
Um, New Zealand is somewhat unique among Western democracies
and our lack of constraints on executive power.
We don't have an upper house
and our judiciary doesn't have the power
to strike down legislation
and consistent with our basic rights
and freedoms, the only real constraint on power is the
participation of the voting public at the ballot
box every three years.
As a result, the nonpartisan nature
of electoral law is supremely important.
The everyday functioning
of our democratic system depends more
than anything on culture.
Um, the level of trust
that we have in our democratic institutions
and the voluntary adherence to conventions
and norms by our political actors.
One such norm is that the significant changes
to electoral law are only made by cross partisan consensus.
And we see this reflected in
that the very few entrenched sections in New Zealand law are
in the electoral act
and concerned the term of parliament,
the secret ballot and the voting age.
And it is in some respects, a reflection of the golden rule.
Whatever else political parties might disagree on,
there is a rec reciprocal expectation
that the other party will not change the rules of the game
to their own advantage.
Without this understanding,
New Zealand would be little different
to authoritarian states like China,
where there is no contest of power.
For this reason, I view any change to electoral law
that does not have cross partisan agreement
as potentially very dangerous.
Um, and so I would like to ask
that this change be abandoned.
Thank you.
Right. Hey, um, the one, you raised a couple
of points right at the very end,
which no one else has raised.
I do not support the intent of some other provisions such
as small party audit exemption
and the prohibition of MPS being scrutinous.
You think, um, could you wanna comment on those two?
Uh, yes. So the, the pro the prohibition,
the prohibition on, um,
MPS being scrutinous I think is reasonable.
Um, I don't, uh,
and I think also the small party, um,
exemption from reporting is probably fine as well.
Um, I don't have any particular objection to those changes.
Right. Okay. Cool. You've got question, right. Alright.
Hey, thank you Mr. Hawkins for your, um, your submission.
Good luck with your studies
and doing all that sort of stuff.
Alright, thanks very much. Have a good day.
Alright, thank you very much. Thank you.
Thank Right now I think, uh, hopefully we've got Mr. Duncan.
Is it? Yeah, we just following them right?
We've got two members.
We've got two people or organizations left.
We're just trying to track them down. Have we got TC come?
No, they're un, un all, so,
so we won't be hearing from the tertiary education union.
Apparently they aware. Well, so now just trying
to get hold of Mr. Duncan. There's
No reason we can't is it?
What's that reschedule the TEC, it's illness. Mm-hmm.
We have to if they're keen to. Yep. Right.
Um, this is a lucky last, isn't it?
Yeah.
I wish someone is just calling.
We're just calling to try and get them on members.
So we wondering what's happening.
Are we on mute?
Is he, is he on now? Mr. Duncan?
I understand you're on, you'll need to get off mute.
Uh, from what we can see,
please press star says, uh oh.
You also need to press start. Star six. Star six.
Ah, thank you sir. Hello. Hey, nice that you've joined
Us. Hello. Thank you, sir.
Nice that you can join us a little bit early Mr. Duncan.
So appreciate you coming and joining us. That's right.
So we've got five minutes or so with you.
That's all right. I'm not stressed.
Do you wanna start talking? Oh, sorry. Oh, now?
Yeah, you're, you're alive.
Everyone's waited with bait breath.
Oh, okay. I have not done this before.
Now this is Mr. Goldsmith's thing.
Um, as we were denied our right to vote last election,
as you've seen from what, what I submitted,
and we've had a four month fight to be able to vote.
This one, I'm unsure as to whether
denying people rights to make late votes
or not is the best way forward, really.
I mean, if, if they can't get the main votes right? Right.
We, we are gonna have to do this song
and dance again when it comes to women, the,
the main elections yet.
And, and why should anyone have
to vote, fight for their rights?
Uh, and it's a good question.
I mean, why, why should someone have, I mean, the Bill
of Rights Act was put in there for a reason back in 88.
My ex-boss mother actually helped write it at
that time when I was working for him.
So I've got a little bit of understanding about the Bill
of Rights Act and I mean,
why put it there in the first place?
If you're gonna sit there
and play with a bill of rights, then leave it alone.
Just what, what's a few dollars compared
to the grand scheme of women?
Everything else that's been floating around.
And I mean, I get that Mr.
Goldsmith's grumbling about cost
and that, that those last few weeks are costs,
but we all pay taxes for that anyway.
So what, what's he gonna do with the extra money?
Uh, that, that's the thing. I, I don't understand.
And I do get that Australia's come along
and have this, they, they've done it to some form
of success, but yeah, you know,
Australia, when they don't want New Zealand is just kick
them back to New Zealand and we try
and kick Australians back to Australia.
Where do they go? They stay here.
So why should we follow Australia?
And I don't get that either.
But you know, I mean, as things are, as they stand,
I mean, if people have gotta struggle to try
and get their rights to vote as it is
because of government shortcomings,
then government needs to sort government shortcomings out
before government starts sorting things out.
Because he's throwing stones right now at Windows.
And if he can't sort our mess out, why the heck is he trying
to sit there and bring in a new rule?
I mean, I think it's a good question.
So know, when do you go from here?
Well, I, I don't know. Do you leave it as status quo?
Look, I I'm not the person to ask about that, that that's,
that's for you people to decide.
But at the end of the day, it's going to affect a lot
of people, a lot of young people I might have.
And you affect a lot of young people
and the young people are just gonna go, nah,
I'm not even registering anymore.
It's just not worth the effort.
And that's gonna be the end of it.
And then once you get down to 40, 30,
20% voted turnout, what do you do then?
I mean, the, the idea is to encourage people
to register, to vote
and to actually vote not, not to discourage
and kicking people off before they've even registered.
You're gonna discourage that. That's how I see it.
That's my O two's work.
I mean, yeah, I I can't really say much more of that.
So, uh, you use, choose to do what you choose to do,
but there will be implications down the track
and it may not be in five years time, it might be,
and then someone's gonna be asking the question
of how do we get here?
So be careful what you choose to do now is most likely going
to affect people down the track later?
And is it gonna be adversely or is it gonna benefit
or is it gonna benefit the government
because then they get
to save a couple hundred grand or something.
I don't know what it's, but you know,
and I get it, A dollar saves a dollar made.
I understand that. But you know,
we we're in a world now where bosses get you
to do things at the last second.
People change lanes at the last second
because it's been installed into us
to do things at the last second.
And unfortunately this government's sort of pushed that.
And that's just how it is.
So if people are gonna register to vote at the last second,
and then everyone complains about it in Go government,
well who's to blame?
Because, you know, our lives are at the last second.
That's just how it is.
Unfortunately, we, we don't normally plan anymore.
Well, not from what I've seen with the majority,
and that that's it.
So you, you do what you will.
That's my, my say in the matter.
And I'll, I'll leave you to up from there.
Hey, thank you Mr. Duncan
for your contribution this afternoon and joining us. Uh,
You are welcome, sir.
Very much appreciate it. All right, thank you.
Okay, bye-bye Now, members, um, we are at the end
of the submissions this afternoon,
so we're gonna now go back into private session.
So you'll need to cut out and go, come back in. Okay.